README.md, before:

# brics_jupyterhub_envs

BriCS JupyterHub service development and deployment environments

## JupyterHub-Slurm development environment

Create an environment where JupyterHub and Slurm run in separate containers and interact over the network, e.g. JupyterHub container connects to Slurm container via SSH to run job management tasks. This environment should model the production environment for JupyterHub running on and interacting with Slurm on BriCS infrastructure (e.g. Isambard-AI).

### Design

#### Base images

* JupyterHub: [jupyterhub](https://github.com/jupyterhub/jupyterhub), <https://quay.io/repository/jupyterhub/jupyterhub> 
* Slurm: [Docker-Slurm](https://github.com/owhere/docker-slurm), <https://hub.docker.com/r/nathanhess/slurm>

#### Configuration and logging data outside of containers

Configure and customise the behaviour of the images using data from outside of the container (e.g. volumes, `ConfigMap`s, `Secret`s)

#### Minimal modify of base images

Modify the JupyterHub and Slurm base images as little as possible to enable them to interact and model the production environment.

#### JupyterHub connects to Slurm over SSH

To run Slurm job management commands required for [batchspawner](https://github.com/jupyterhub/batchspawner/) (`sbatch`, `squeue`, `scancel`), JupyterHub will connect to the Slurm container via SSH. This will allow the JupyterHub container to be easily reused with other (non-containerised) Slurm instances in production, simply by configuring an SSH connection.

#### Kubernetes-like deployment in `podman` pod

Use [`podman kube play`](https://docs.podman.io/en/stable/markdown/podman-kube-play.1.html) to enable multi-container deployment in a `podman pod` using a Kubernetes manifest.

This should enable the solution to be easily adapted for deployment in a Kubernetes environment in the future.

### Try it

TODO

### Useful commands

To inspect contents of a podman named volume `jupyterhub_root` (extracts contents into current directory):

* On macOS (using a podman machine VM)

  ```shell
  podman machine ssh podman volume export jupyterhub_root | tar --extract --verbose
  ```

* On Linux (without a podman machine VM)

  ```shell
  podman volume export jupyterhub_root | tar --extract --verbose
  ```

To tear down the pod manually (without the launcher script):

* Based on the K8s YAML manifest `jh_slurm_pod.yaml`

  ```shell
  podman kube down jh_slurm_pod.yaml 
  ```

* Without the manifest (pod is named `jupyterhub-slurm`)

  ```shell
  podman pod stop jupyterhub-slurm
  podman pod rm jupyterhub-slurm
  ```

* To manually remove a named volume `jupyterhub_root` (without the launcher script):

  ```shell
  podman volume rm jupyterhub_root
  ```

* To manually remove the secret `jupyterhub-slurm-ssh-client-key` (without the launcher script)

  ```shell
  podman secret rm jupyterhub-slurm-ssh-client-key
  ```

Commit message:

Note about need to create dev_realauth dev_users locally

README.md, after:

# brics_jupyterhub_envs

BriCS JupyterHub service development and deployment environments

## JupyterHub-Slurm development environment

Create an environment where JupyterHub and Slurm run in separate containers and interact over the network, e.g. JupyterHub container connects to Slurm container via SSH to run job management tasks. This environment should model the production environment for JupyterHub running on and interacting with Slurm on BriCS infrastructure (e.g. Isambard-AI).

### Design

#### Base images

* JupyterHub: [jupyterhub](https://github.com/jupyterhub/jupyterhub), <https://quay.io/repository/jupyterhub/jupyterhub> 
* Slurm: [Docker-Slurm](https://github.com/owhere/docker-slurm), <https://hub.docker.com/r/nathanhess/slurm>

#### Configuration and logging data outside of containers

Configure and customise the behaviour of the images using data from outside of the container (e.g. volumes, `ConfigMap`s, `Secret`s)

#### Minimal modify of base images

Modify the JupyterHub and Slurm base images as little as possible to enable them to interact and model the production environment.

#### JupyterHub connects to Slurm over SSH

To run Slurm job management commands required for [batchspawner](https://github.com/jupyterhub/batchspawner/) (`sbatch`, `squeue`, `scancel`), JupyterHub will connect to the Slurm container via SSH. This will allow the JupyterHub container to be easily reused with other (non-containerised) Slurm instances in production, simply by configuring an SSH connection.

#### Kubernetes-like deployment in `podman` pod

Use [`podman kube play`](https://docs.podman.io/en/stable/markdown/podman-kube-play.1.html) to enable multi-container deployment in a `podman pod` using a Kubernetes manifest.

This should enable the solution to be easily adapted for deployment in a Kubernetes environment in the future.

### Try it

TODO

> [!NOTE]
> The `dev_realauth` environment does not have a predefined set of test users in `config/dev_realauth/dev_users`, unlike the `dev_dummyauth` environment, where the test users are listed in tracked file [`config/dev_dummyauth/dev_users`](./config/dev_dummyauth/dev_users).
> The corresponding `config/dev_realauth/dev_users` file is ignored by Git and should be created/edited locally to match the users expected to authenticate to the dev environment.
>
> The format of the `dev_users` file is 1 username of the form `<USER>.<PROJECT>` per line, where `<USER>` corresponds to the `short_name` authentication token claim and `<PROJECT>` is a key from the `projects` authentication token claim.

### Useful commands

To inspect contents of a podman named volume `jupyterhub_root` (extracts contents into current directory):

* On macOS (using a podman machine VM)

  ```shell
  podman machine ssh podman volume export jupyterhub_root | tar --extract --verbose
  ```

* On Linux (without a podman machine VM)

  ```shell
  podman volume export jupyterhub_root | tar --extract --verbose
  ```

To tear down the pod manually (without the launcher script):

* Based on the K8s YAML manifest `jh_slurm_pod.yaml`

  ```shell
  podman kube down jh_slurm_pod.yaml 
  ```

* Without the manifest (pod is named `jupyterhub-slurm`)

  ```shell
  podman pod stop jupyterhub-slurm
  podman pod rm jupyterhub-slurm
  ```

* To manually remove a named volume `jupyterhub_root` (without the launcher script):

  ```shell
  podman volume rm jupyterhub_root
  ```

* To manually remove the secret `jupyterhub-slurm-ssh-client-key` (without the launcher script)

  ```shell
  podman secret rm jupyterhub-slurm-ssh-client-key
  ```
